==========
JavaScript
==========

.. sectionauthor:: Bernhard Posselt <dev@bernhard-posselt.com>

The JavaScript files reside in the **js/** folder and should be included in the template:

.. code-block:: php

  <?php
  // add one file
  script('myapp', 'script');  // adds js/script.js

  // add multiple files in the same app
  script('myapp', array('script', 'navigation'));  //  adds js/script.js js/navigation.js

  // add vendor files (also allows the array syntax)
  vendor_script('myapp', 'script');  //  adds vendor/script.js

If the script file is only needed when the file list is displayed, you should
listen to the ``OCA\Files::loadAdditionalScripts`` event:

.. code-block:: php

  <?php
  $eventDispatcher = \OC::$server->getEventDispatcher();
  $eventDispatcher->addListener('OCA\Files::loadAdditionalScripts', function() {
    script('myapp', 'script');  // adds js/script.js
    vendor_script('myapp', 'script');  //  adds vendor/script.js
  });


Sending the CSRF token
----------------------

If any other JavaScript request library than jQuery is being used, the requests need to send the CSRF token as an HTTP header named **requesttoken**. The token is available in the global variable **oc_requesttoken**.

For AngularJS the following lines would need to be added:

.. code-block:: js

    var app = angular.module('MyApp', []).config(['$httpProvider', function($httpProvider) {
        $httpProvider.defaults.headers.common.requesttoken = oc_requesttoken;
    }]);


Generating URLs
---------------

To send requests to Nextcloud the base URL where Nextcloud is currently running is needed. To get the base URL use:

.. code-block:: js

    var baseUrl = OC.generateUrl('');

Full URLs can be generated by using:

.. code-block:: js

    var authorUrl = OC.generateUrl('/apps/myapp/authors/1');


Extending core parts
--------------------

It is possible to extend components of the core web UI. The following examples
should show how this is possible.

Extending the "new" menu in the files app
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 9.0

.. code-block:: js

    var myFileMenuPlugin = {
        attach: function (menu) {
            menu.addMenuEntry({
                id: 'abc',
                displayName: 'Menu display name',
                templateName: 'templateName.ext',
                iconClass: 'icon-filetype-text',
                fileType: 'file',
                actionHandler: function () {
                    console.log('do something here');
                }
            });
        }
    };
    OC.Plugins.register('OCA.Files.NewFileMenu', myFileMenuPlugin);

This will register a new menu entry in the "New" menu of the files app. The
method ``attach()`` is called once the menu is built. This usually happens right
after the click on the button.


Loading Initial state
---------------------

Often apps have some kind of initial state. Often the first thing a script does
is querying an endpoint to obtain this initial state. This makes the user
experience sub optimal as they have to wait for yet another request to finish
loading.

To provide the initial state in a standardized way quickly to the javascript
Nextcloud provides an API. The API consists of a PHP part (that supllies the state)
and a JS part (that fetches and parses the state).

Providing the initial state with PHP
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Providing state in PHP is done via the ``\OCP\IInitialStateService``. This service
has two methods you can use to provide the initial state.

* ``provideInitialState(string $appName, string $key, $data)``: Use this method
if you know for sure your state will be used. For example on the settings page
of your app.
* ``provideLazyInitialState(string $appName, string $key, Closure $closure)``:
Use this method if you want to inject your state on a general page. For example
the initial state of the notifications app. The callback will be invoked if and only if a template is rendered.

You call both methods with the name of your app and a key. This is to scope
the states properly. You will need both when retrieving the initial state in
javascript.

The data for the initial state is converted to JSON. So be sure that the
data you provide (either in $data or as a return from the $closure) can be converted
to JSON.

Obtaining the initial state in JavaScript
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To obtain the initial state in your JavaScript you have to only call one
function

.. code-block:: js

    const state = OCP.InitialState.loadState('MyApp', 'MyState');

Now state will contain the provided state which you can use as any variable. It
is as simple as that.
